to
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Terbivill.
World War II, of course, was fought primarily in Europe and the Pacific, but there was never
any guarantee that the enemy from either side would not find its way to the United States
shores.
Frank Buill got permission from his mother to enter the U.S. Navy at the age of 17.
That was in May of 1944.
Just 15 months before Japan surrendered.
While waiting for an opening to go to flight school, he was assigned as a bombardier flying
B-24s and later PB-4Y-2s.
Out of 24 crews, his was one of four assigned to stay stateside and train while at the
same time guarding the East Coast from deployments, mainly in Florida.
Please welcome Frank Buill to Veterans of the Valley.
You're a 17-year-old kid and you were going into the Navy that kind of grew up fast when
you go straight into the service, don't you?
Yes, you do.
You learn in hurry.
But your mom had no qualms about going ahead and signing the permission and letting you
join up at that time because there wasn't war going on.
Right.
I found a later that she hoped I'd go into the Army because she didn't like the Navy
and she didn't like the Air Force.
So I got both.
There's one irony in your story.
As we talked about in the beginning, you flew on B-24s and then later the PB-4Y-2s.
You had previously worked at a company in Fort Worth and you were a riveter and actually
worked on those airplanes.
Right.
Contended multi.
And so that was ironic that you would later fly in those airplanes.
That's true.
Yeah, I didn't expect that.
Let's talk about your service and sort of when you went in and sort of how you got
to your final deployments or where you did deploy on the East Coast.
You went to Jacksonville for boot camp and then from there we went to Memphis, Tennessee
for Naval Air Technical Training Center.
And I trained as an ordnanceman and radar.
And then from there we went back to Jacksonville for gunry school and because I had a good record
why they offered me mom and dearest training.
And so I went to mom and dearest training in Cape Canaveral.
I offered to go to Navigator School but they wouldn't agree.
And then we switched to training for development or going to squadrons duty, flying out of
Miami Naval Air Station and flying down along the coast of Cuba and out south of Cuba on
East Puerto Rico and back through the Bahamas.
Let's talk about that aspect of service during World War II because most of the people
that serve in the war you think of them serving in the Pacific or the European.
Theater.
This was a very important aspect obviously of the war.
Sort of.
Were you surprised that you were in the crew that was chosen to stay state-side or were
you figuring to go to the Pacific?
We were expecting to go to the Pacific.
We didn't know until we were all lined up and he told the crews that they would have
30 days delay leaving on delay to San Diego to go to the Pacific.
We were supposed to go to Rotta in the Quatcheline Islands or somewhere in the Africa now.
But at the end he called off four crews and said that you're going to be going to the
Atlantic and sent us to Norfolk, Virginia and we stayed there for a while and they transferred
us to Eden and North Carolina to the Naval Air Station and went into Squadron 214 which
flew the coastline, shipping lines, watching for submarines and weather.
Talk more about that.
What was the nature of your missions?
You would go off, you wouldn't fly every day but when you didn't fly.
What was your job?
What were you doing?
We just cruised the shipping lanes and looked for problems, weather problems or what have
you and we usually went out for either four or eight hours and occasionally we would fly
as much as 12 hours on a longer trip.
But we would have certain sectors to follow when we went out depending on who went on
four or eight hours or whatever.
And we'd fly carry a lunch with us.
Carry us up before we go out at night.
Indeed.
Well you talked about looking for weather and we'll talk about that in the minute because
you flew into a couple of hurricanes which kind of dicey but as far as when you say looking
for other problems, looking for enemy, looking for a German submarine.
German submarines.
Sure.
I don't know if I popped up one time.
Yes.
Right off the coast where we were going to bombardier school.
One came up one day and before we could get a bomb loaded on the plane he disappeared
again and then they were in spotty mostly went out looking for him.
Right.
We had to do guard duty on the beach every night.
Some with had, let's see we went on for four hours.
Four hour shifts and walked the beaches carrying a rifle over our back and that was sort of scary
too.
We think of all sorts of things happening.
Exactly.
You flew down I know to Cuba and there was some reconnaissance there because that's
where some of the submarines were getting refueled and things like that.
Yes.
They had some creeks or little rivers where they'd run in under trees and do some stuff
up in the trees to hide the submarine and they stored gasoline or fuel oil there and
whatever food they needed and things like that.
And they'd run out and catch the ships and the shipping lane.
Right.
As a matter of fact the only ship I ever sunk was one that had been hit by a torpedo and
they called us when we were out on one of our flights and asked us to bomb a ship that
had sunk down just almost to the level of the deck.
They had had some ammunition and stuff stored on it, shipping to England.
Right.
They asked us to bomb it and sink it because they were afraid to go back on board after
the crew had left.
Where was this?
That was in just off Jacksonville, Northern Florida.
Right.
So that was the ship that you saw.
Yes.
It was cargo ship loaded with ammunition.
Right.
I bet you can remember that day when you dropped the bomb and sucked the ship.
Until you had four right across.
And did you get them with all four?
No.
One hit the ship, one hit right alongside the others.
But you did the job, yeah.
Talk about the aircraft.
The B24 obviously a very high profile aircraft of World War II.
And then sort of following it a very similar airplane, the PB-4 Y-2 which is also called
the privateer.
Yes.
two planes and talk about the B-24 first.
Okay. I don't even remember now how long the B-24 was. It was probably 50 something
feet long, somewhere in that neighborhood. Wings were about 24 feet each way.
And it had twin rudders. Right. But that's what's very distinctive about it.
It's the twin rudders. We'll see. We'll see. We may have the head of nose and tail turret
and one top turret and belly turret. Right. And then you could fire machine guns
out the side windows. Right. And on the B-24 Y-2 it was designed to be 8 feet
longer to leave an additional room for radar bombing gear and some other gear that they
needed to put in for long patrols. Right. It had six turrets. Right. It had six turrets.
Right. Running the nose, two on top, one on the tail and two on the side. Right. Right.
And they would sweep all the way down and cross about 40 feet under the plane. Uh-huh. Crossfire.
Right. So, right. It was much better equipped for patrol.
And its tail or rudder was the more traditional. Yes. Single tail. Right. Right. Right.
Right. Right. You liked the PB better. Right. Of course. The job that you had to do.
Uh-huh. Particularly. And the nose, well the nose turret was a round turret that could go
in the B-24, the turret could only raise the guns up and down and it turned sideways. Right.
So, you had trouble tracking the plane coming down across. But, uh, you could, in the PB-4 Y-2,
the round turret, the guns moved with the turret and you could go anywhere you wanted to with it.
Right. And if you tracked the plane down and under or something like that, you'd wind up
not going where you were. Uh-huh. And, uh, usually the plane would turn when we were practicing
that. Right. Turn away or turn into a plane that was coming towards us and give more
guns and opportunities to fire at it. But, uh, the, uh, gunner in front would get lost sometimes.
And he could look around, couldn't see the airplane behind him because he was facing away from it.
Right. And he'd have to just run his turret around to see, uh,
right until he saw some part of the plane. Indeed. And then he landed that.
I know you told me in the Navy that your, your missions were mainly single, single plane,
uh, patrol bombing missions. We never went double. Right. Always went single. Yeah. And you
usually stayed under 5,000 feet or around 5,000 feet or even lower. Generally, we were around 5,000.
If we were running a bombing run or something like that, we'd go in lower because it was easier
to hit the target. Right. You said sometimes you'd be so low you'd just be right over the wave
tops because the submarines had a harder time seeing you that way, right? We had a
altimeter setting in the Bomberdeer's compartment and the pilot had his above. And before we flew
a flight, I always had to go check the pilots. Dealing set ours, uh, seven feet below
his, his up on the dash and mine was down on the floor. Right. To the side. One day we went out
flying and I forgot to set mine. And we were flying long for a practice run, bombing run. And, uh,
I said, can you put it down a little lower? I said, you're up by 100 feet. Let's put down a
lower. And so he dropped it down. And the water started blowing up on the Bomberdeers.
And I looked at it and it was still showed that we were above water. No, it showed that we were below
water. It hadn't been said. But we were close enough so that the wind was blowing the water off
the wave tops and catching the nose of the plane. Right. Most time water on the windshield is
rain. This was, this was ocean water coming back and back. Most of your missions, thankfully,
I would imagine we're mostly routine, but there are some that were far from routine and you
told me about a couple of them. First of all, I want you to talk about is the time that you were,
you flew into a hurricane. Yeah. Actually, the Navy had never flown into a hurricane before.
And they had heard about an army, be 17, that had flown into a hurricane and reported the weather.
And so they alerted us at any time a hurricane was coming up or any of the ships reported
hurricanes or something like that, that they wanted us to fly into it if we were close to it. So
they sent us a message over the radio that there was a hurricane just south east of Cuba or just
south of Cuba. And so we flew down and we're circling with the wind and going into it. And
at first it seemed not too bad. It's we got into it a little deeper though. Sometimes we'd just
drop about a hundred feet or 150 feet first thing, you know, we'd shoot up 100, 200 feet.
And it really got scary. Several of us got sick. And with 12 members of crew there that smelled
things that pretty bad. But we did go into the out of the hurricane and then flew right back out
again and it was just as bad coming out as it was going in. But I don't know what the winds were
because our equipment wouldn't measure them. Right. It didn't go high enough. But we did
circle all the way around it then and flew back in. Yeah. And we didn't suffer any damage,
but it was just rough. Really rough. Really rough. You said that was the second most
scared you've ever been. Yeah. And a little while we'll talk about the time that it was the
most scared that you were in your mission. Let's go to some photographs right now out of an album that
you gave us. Frank Duel. And this is you and Gloria. Yes, that's my wife on wedding day. And
that was in 1952. Right. We married. I met her in probably October of 51. Right. And
when you all were at North Texas State. We were at North Texas. I was working on my master's and
she was working on her doctorate in the library service. And we a friend of mine said,
, hey, you would like to go to the ballgame this afternoon. I said, sure, Saturday afternoon.
I had a football game. And he said, how about a blind date? I said, great. Sure. I'm up for a blind
date. He said, well, I know a girl over one of the dormitories and I'll call our nasker if she's
got a roommate or sweet mate or something. So she had a roommate. And we agreed to pick them up
the proper time and went over and I parked my car and we walked up to the dorm and they were
coming down to us some steps. And Gloria was 5'10 and I was a little over six feet. But she just
kept coming down the stairs and coming down the stairs before we saw her face. I thought, man,
that's the girl that's the one. That's the one. And so we met outside the dorm. She introduced her
girlfriend to both of us and he introduced me or he'd introduced me to her and then she introduced
her girlfriend to both of us and we talked just from you and I just reached over to Gloria by
the elbow and said, shall we go and just walked off with her. And so you hadn't been paired up yet
but you made sure the pairing was what you wanted, right? That's right. And he didn't like it at all.
And here's some 57 years later. You still got her by the arm, right? And here we go. Let's go to
some more photographs here. You're not in this picture. This is part of the crew, I guess.
Yeah, there's the master mechanic and the middle one has radio operator and the one on the right
is also a radio operator. And we had a bunch of pictures like this in places in that
catch me but that's the way we went. Dungeries and now here is the privateer. Yeah, here's the
privateer. This is the BBY-4Y-2. And in the nose, that's where the front gunner is, right?
Yes, right. And you're actually down below that. You can sort of see the shine of the windshield
where the bottom of the beer is. That's pretty tight quarters. You have to crawl in and stay down
because you can't stand up in there. It's not enough room. And the white and the yield down
underneath was our radar. I see. Here. Right. And we tracked planes with it. Got another photograph of
the same BBY-4 airplane. Oh, that's the BBY-24. This is the BBY-24. Right, with the double hull.
We flew BBY-24s until the BBY-4Y-2s came out. Right. Right. This is a photograph that I actually
got off of the internet, which was a good, inflite picture of the BBY-24. And now here's another
picture from your album, I believe, of BBY-24. That was actually in your group. Right. That was in
training to go into Guadalupe and Didi. Right. Right. Okay. Next one. This is a... Okay.
That was a bombardier school. And that was a bunch of the guys that were in bombardier training. Right.
Right. And Frank, is the back row just almost right in the middle of the tall skinny guy that's...
Dead center. Yeah, Dead center. You're standing... No, just to the left to the front. Right.
Right. You're standing to the left of the guy with his hat that's caught there. That's you right there.
Okay. Now you're on the right on this one. I'm on the right. Crawford in the middle and
breaks on the left. Yeah. Where was this ticket? Do you recall? It's been a few years. It's one of our...
It was one of our crude deals that I don't remember exactly. Right. Right. You were at ease while
say that. We were at ease. You should see some of the pictures we had. Well, you saw something.
Yeah, I did, but you were really at ease. Yeah. And there again, I'm Dead center. Yeah, in the top row.
Section G of Class G8. Yes. From your office. Right. They were there taking the train center.
Let's talk about the other time that was rather dicey moment. This one really was and it involved
a flight where the normal pilot was on leave for personal reasons. And so another co-pilot had
been brought in and they were being trained to go from the B-24 to the P-B-4Y-2. Right. Yes.
And the co-pilot who was in charge pretty much the kind of loss control. Yes. Talk about what happened.
We were doing various activities or various
motions to show how the plane handled different from the B-24Y. And he was having us to do a 60 degree
bank. And we went up in the bank and the co-pilot froze the controls. And the test pilot from
consolidated Valtee that had tested the planes, whacked him in the head. I don't know whether it was
fist or something and knocked him cold. And the next thing I heard, and I was in the rear of the
plane listening to give him responses on the conditions and I heard him say, dammit push the nose
down. Dammit push the nose down and then he whacked him and we rolled over on her back. And
the plane dropped off and started spinning around upside down with one wing lower than the
other. And we had been told that if we ever went into a spin that we would only last about two
turns, two complete spins. Right. Well, I counted that and it was gone before we ever got
over. But the pilot finally got the plane over so that he got it going nose down.
And we lost about 8,000 feet and cleared off about probably about 400 feet.
And he knew the plane wasn't flying right and so he just flew it right into the base and landed.
We were just probably five or six miles out from the base.
And it was a scary moment and the pilot didn't threaten his own skill for most of that when
you got on the ground, right? We got on the ground and he got out and he said, okay, guys, let's
kneel and pray. And one of the guys said, why were down? And he said, we need to thank God
were down because I didn't have control of that plane. He said, God had it. Right. And he said,
all I did was to hold it for landing. Right. And when it was on approach at about 400 feet,
that's all he had control of it. That's right. As far as getting it on course, aiming nose to the
right way. That's right. And we just happened to be lucky to be right, run on into the runway.
Right. And he just came in landed. Right. And when we dug the airplane, the rudder has been over
about 10 degrees. And there are parts of the tail and one of the ailerons missing off the plane.
It had really been through it. So there was another time, Trip, I think, back from our two
Puerto Rico. You said that a couple of engines went out. Yeah. Right. Right. We were flying. Yes.
We were flying back in one engine went out. It had an oil leak or something went out. And then
as we turned to come back towards home, another engine developed heating problems. And it went out.
They're both on the same wing. Right. And so we were flying along sort of lopsided. But we flew into
the Bahamas just almost just before dark. And the British had an air base there. And but they had
closed their base down. Right. At summertime. Right. And so we came in over the island with
a guy up front shooting a blinker, guy in signaling and the guy up on top of the yellow open
and compartment there. And he was firing rockets out. And then the radio operator was calling
us OS, SOS, we landed. Right. And we went over NASA and the pilot said, well, fellas, if
if we don't make it this next time, we're having to go in the ocean. And so he turned and we came back in.
And the lights came on just as we got over the island. And it turns out a guy had just come out of
a club from having his last beer. This is all you all flashing at him. And he ran over and turned
on the lights. I'm glad he didn't order one more beer. And might have been a problem. Frank,
we've just got a couple of two and a half minutes left or so. And you got out in June of 1946.
You were 20 years old. You went into education. You went to North Texas and got your degree.
And eventually you got a doctorate. I know and all that. And you were in Carrollton for 20 years,
teaching. Yes. Also taught it, taught all the way through. I was there 20 years, but I held
almost every position in the district. And when I left, I was acting superintendent.
You taught at TCU. You were an instructional consultant all over Texas after actually retiring
at the age of 57. You met your wife Gloria at North Texas. You have a daughter Becky. And you
have three grandchildren. Yes. And but one of your grandchildren, Wendy. And also wanted to mention,
you have a daughter Becky. You and Gloria also had a foster child. A daughter.
A daughter. Who, who, who said, Mary, who sadly you had to give back to her mother when she was
young. But you have a granddaughter, Wendy. And tell us in about a couple of minutes if you can't
about how you came by when. Yeah. Jessica's our granddaughter. And she was in the girl's house.
And so the church here in town was sponsoring the Arfinage and El Salvador. And they got the
girls to give, make up Christmas boxes for the kids. And they got to look at kids pictures and
Jessica picked a cute little girl named Wendy. And she made up a box for her. And she stuck a
picture of her in a letter and a Christmas card in it. And then several months later, long in the
spring, Steve's builder. And they went out to see the building or builder supplies at the
prizes center. And different things that were there about construction and building. And he took
back in Jessica with him. And they walked down through the, the looking at things he was interested
in, I guess, and Wendy saw the church, the, the, the, the, the, and up on top of some boxes was a
picture of Wendy. Right. And she was holding Jessica's picture on her chest. And so they looked at
that and they thought, gosh, what a pretty little girl she was. And they got to talking about it.
You suppose we can adopt her. Right. We'd be glad to take another child. And it turns out that
after a long, long process that took a few years, it's a great, great story. But three years,
three years that they brought Wendy home. This. And she came, they came to our apartment. Right. And
Jessica came running in with Wendy and Wendy just ran to us. And well, oh, oh, oh, oh,
grandfather, grandmother and holding Wendy now. She's 10 now. Yeah. That's a wonderful story.
Yeah. That's a wonderful story. I know you love all your grandchildren, but that's wonderful story.
She's, she's quite unusual. She's special bringing her from El Salvador. We're out of time.
Thank you for being with us. And thank you for your service. Enjoy it. Thank you, Frank.
Frank Buell served two years and a month in the US Navy involved in the all important task of
keeping our shores safe. He followed his military service with a career in education, which of course
is one of equal honor. We salute Frank Buell for his service as we do all veterans. I'm Tom
Terpaville. Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.